When we think of unity, the words of Psalm 133-1 may come to mind. Let's read them.
Now, the words aren't going to be on the screen, so let's look them up in the Bible.
I'll give you a moment. That's Psalm 133 and verse 1.
It says,
Look, how good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity.
Well, we certainly agree with these words of David.
Now, speaking of David, he knew the value of unity.
And we may remember that he didn't always get to experience it in his own life.
The beginning and the end of his reign were marked by civil war,
the fairy opposite of unity.
But you'd think it would have been easy for the Israelites to remain united.
After all, they came from the same roots. They were all children of Abraham.
They spoke a common language, Hebrew. And they came from a similar social background.
The ancestors had all been slaves in Egypt, so there was no business for anybody to rag about
his heritage. Still, the Israelites found reasons to hate one another.
Israel's first king was from Benjamin. Its second king was from Judah.
That was reason enough to start a war in Israel.
Let's fast forward now to the first century.
Unity is so important that it was on Jesus' mind on the night before he died.
You remember, he prayed to his father that his disciples might be one,
just as he and the father are one.
Now that could have been a challenge. Why do we say that?
From a human standpoint, there was no reason for Jesus' disciples to be united.
Unlike the Israelites, they did not have a common ancestor.
They did not have a common mother tongue. And they came from a variety of social backgrounds.
Think of it. The first Christians were Jews or Jewish proselytes.
Growing up, they were taught that Gentiles were unclean and they wouldn't even enter the
home of a Gentile, let alone preached to one. As for Gentile Christians, they came from every
nation under heaven. Most of them knew nothing of the Hebrew language or the Hebrew scriptures.
They'd worshipped false gods. Some had been highly educated in Athens, Alexandria,
or some other center of worldly wisdom. Others had little formal education.
Yet when they accepted the truth, Christians became united and it peaceed with one another.
The Apostle Paul wanted to help them to safeguard that bond of peace. Now that's the theme of our
discussion this morning. And we're going to look at his words recorded at Ephesians chapter 4
verses 3 to 6. And we're going to focus in on a particular expression in these verses.
This is Ephesians chapter 4. I'll give you a moment. Ephesians chapter 4 and we're going to read
verses 3 to 6. Now Paul is interested in unity here, so let's see how he frames his discussion.
He says, earnestly and devoring, so an effort is involved, earnestly and devoring,
to maintain the oneness of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace. One body there is,
and one Spirit, just as you were called to the one hope of your calling, and many emphasizes,
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all. Now let's go back to verse 3 and look
at the expression the uniting bond of peace. So our discussion is safeguard the uniting bond of peace.
Now the study Bible has an interesting note on that expression. It tells us that the word
translated uniting bond can also be translated ligament, ligament, and it is translated ligament in
other verses. Now we know what a ligament is. It's a band of strong tissue that holds our
bones together. So when we talk about the uniting bond of peace, we mean that peace is the ligament.
It's the tissue that holds God's people together. That was true in the first century, and it's true
today. Like the early Christians, we come from different backgrounds. We speak different languages.
Yet Jehovah has shown us how to remain united and at peace.
Now let's explain what we mean by being united to be united. Does it mean that we all have to
like the same things or we all have to think the same on every subject? There's room for a variety
of tastes and opinions. There's variety on this convention program. We don't all wear the same
style of suit or have the same color of tie. What about you? What's your favorite color?
Your favorite food. Your favorite pet. In Jehovah's organization, there are dog lovers and cat
lovers, and not everyone likes the same breed of dog or cat. Have you ever visited someone who has
a pet that he thinks is just adorable? You take one look at the animal and you wonder how
anyone could love a face like that. Yet he does. People are different, and their pets are
grateful for that. The variety we find among God's people today will continue on into the new world.
Jehovah loves variety. How many colors are there? How many species of plants, birds, and animals?
Among God's creation, we find the simple and the complex, the plain and the fancy,
the sweet and the sour, the rough and the smooth. There's great variety among people,
even in the new world. Perfect humans won't have the same personality, talents, and abilities.
You've always wanted to play the violin. Don't think when you're perfect you'll just be able to
pick up a violin and play, and there's no guarantee you'll be able to play in an orchestra.
Now, one way to maintain unity is to respect the conscience of others. This is very important,
because very often when unity is disturbed, it's because we don't respect the ability of other
brothers and sisters to decide things for themselves. Now, what do we mean by the conscience?
Let's be simple. It's the faculty that helps us determine right from wrong. I'm going to repeat that.
The conscience is the faculty to determine right from wrong. Now, let's consider how our
upbringing and our culture can help shape our personal view of right and wrong.
In some cultures, there are large families. Conversation around the dinner table is loud. You can
hardly hear yourself think. The children tease one another and don't hesitate to ask each other
personal questions. The girls borrow each other's clothes, sometimes without asking. Some people would
say that's wrong. Put the girls to do nothing wrong with it and neither do their parents. In other
cultures, family members are polite and courteous, but they don't talk much about their plans or
their feelings. The parents don't often talk about their past because they value their privacy.
Now, some who were raised that way tend to be rather strict with themselves and others. They have
definite views of right and wrong. Borrow their clothes without asking and they'll say,
that's stealing. I'm calling the elders. There are no gray areas with them.
Now, there are lots of exceptions and we're not saying that everyone in a certain culture fits
the bill, but you get the idea. Now, what do you suppose happens when a publisher from one
culture moves into a congregation where the other culture predominates? If he doesn't adjust
his way of viewing others, he'll be miserable. Is one way right and the other wrong? No. Members
of both cultures could learn from one another. Speaking of culture, we might ask ourselves,
how do I feel about brothers and sisters who come from cultures that are very different from
my own? Let me speak with an accent. Their style of dress may be different. Their manners and
food may not be what we're used to. Suppose that an elder is younger than we are or from a different
race. Will we accept his counsel? Will we ask him for counsel? Or will we look for an elder
who's older and from a similar background? Will we celebrate our differences or will we allow them
to disturb our unity? So that's one thing, but let's talk about our personal history. Our
personal history can also affect our view of right and wrong. Some grew up in a household where
alcohol was a problem. Home was not a happy place and as adults, they stay as far away from alcohol
as they can. And they take a dim view of anyone who uses it even in moderation. To them,
it's just plain wrong to drink. Others have only good memories of their childhood home.
At supper time, there was always wine on the table, but nobody ever abused it. A person who left
behind an immoral lifestyle might be extremely sensitive about choices of clothing. He may
be troubled by a clothing style that other brothers and sisters find totally acceptable.
If they're not careful, those who tend to be strict with themselves could impose their
conscience on others. Now let's consider a familiar scenario. Four publishers are working rural
territory in a car group. Now each home is separated from the next by many miles or kilometers.
At the first call, the driver and her companion get out and the other sisters stay in the car
that have no choice. There's no place to go. Now the householder has many questions,
and a Bible study is started. It's noon when the two publishers return to the car. All smiles.
You know what's coming next, don't you? One of the sisters in the back seat says,
well, the two of us can't count any time this morning. What's she done? She's spoken for herself
and for her companion. And unintentionally, she's imposed her own conscience on her friend.
Now she doesn't want to count any time, that's her business. It would be best if she kept
her business to herself. If you've ever visited a foreign country and gone on a guided tour,
probably one of the things the tour guide wanted to show you was the architecture inside a church.
Now some brothers have no problem entering a church if it's part of a tour because to them
it's no different from visiting a museum. Others, who were strong supporters of false religion,
couldn't enter a church for any reason, not even to attend a wedding or a funeral. To them,
it's just plain wrong. Contrances can differ in this respect and we have to respect that,
we have to acknowledge that and we're going to expand on that idea in a moment.
Well, we've hardly scratched the surface when it comes to describing the variety of personalities
and viewpoints in Jehovah's organization. So here's the question, how can we maintain our unity?
Remember what Paul said, earnestly endeavoring to maintain this perfect bond of unity.
It means that we have to put forth effort to maintain that unity. Well, first of all,
it'll help a lot to get well acquainted with brothers and sisters who think differently from us.
Get to know their background. That'll help you to not to over-react when they take a position
that we don't agree with. It'll help us not to judge them. Now, Paul wrote very plainly on that
subject in the words found at Romans chapter 14 and verse 4. Simple statement, but very powerful.
Let's check it out together. Romans chapter 14, I'll give you a moment.
And verse 4. Paul writes, who are you to judge the servant of another?
To his own master, he stands or falls. Indeed, he will be made to stand for Jehovah can make him stand.
Now, let's go back and look at that for a sentence again. Who are you to judge the servant of another?
We know what a judge does. He declares someone guilty or not guilty. That's not our job. Jehovah is the judge.
If each of us concentrates on his own thinking and his own conscience, the peace and unity of the
congregation will be preserved. Well, we all want to be balanced when we determine what is right
and what is wrong. We want to have a balanced view of things, a good conscience. So, how can we be
balanced when determining whether something is right or wrong? Now, in some cases, it's easy. The
Bible tells us, but in other cases, there's no clear answer. Let's consider a scenario we touched
on earlier, the matter of entering a church. Now, that may not be a problem where you live,
but in some places, it's a real issue. And remember, these talks are for our worldwide
brotherhood. So, we're going to consider a subject that will be a real problem for our
menager overcome, and we hope that they will benefit from it. So, here's the scenario.
Two different sisters are married to men who are not in the truth. Now, in both cases,
the husband's mother has died. The funeral will be in a church. One sister decides to go.
The other decides against it. The sister who decides to attend has considered that in that
church, there will just be a talk by a clergyman. There will be no congregation singing, congregation
prayers, or religious gestures. She was never very religious anyway, so none of that would mean
anything to her. And her husband and his family will be happy if she just sits quietly until it's over.
Now, the second sister has a different set of circumstances. The service in that church
involves participation by the congregation. She used to be an active member of that church,
and she's afraid she'll do something she'll regret. Her husband's family get very emotional at
funerals, and they're likely to make a scene if she doesn't participate. So, she respectfully
tells her husband that her attendance could cause him embarrassment and declines to attend.
You can see that each situation is different. Now, we're going to discuss four questions that we
might ask ourselves when we're called upon to make any difficult decision. And I will repeat the
question, because if you're taking notes, you may want to write at least the question down. These
are very, very good questions that we can ask ourselves before we make a difficult decision. Are
you ready? Here's number one. What will make Jehovah happy? I'll repeat that. What will make
Jehovah happy? Now, that should be our main concern to please Jehovah. Well, how do we know what
will make Jehovah happy? We identify the Bible principles that have a bearing on the situation.
One way we can do that is by checking the index or the research guide. What are some
scriptural principles assistive who's married to an unbeliever might consider when deciding whether
to attend a funeral in a church? Can you think of some? What about 1 Peter 3 verse 1?
Lives be in subjection to your husbands. Jehovah is pleased when a Christian woman respects
her husband whether he's in the truth or not. But a wife's subjection is relative. She's
dedicated to Jehovah, not to her husband. She's dedicated to Jehovah, not to her husband.
So that's 1 Peter 3.1. What about Isaiah 52 and verse 11?
Touch nothing unclean. Keep yourselves clean.
Under the mosaic law, if someone so much has touched something unclean, he became unclean.
Many brothers and sisters would find it very hard to sit quietly while a clergyman told lies
about the condition of the dead. To them, it would be touching something unclean.
Others might compare that to a young person in school sitting quietly while his teacher tells lies
about the origin of life. If someone does decide to attend a funeral in a church, he or she should
be absolutely determined not to participate in any religious ritual, whether singing hymns
or so much as saying amen to a prayer that a clergyman offers. Remember the goal? To please
Jehovah. So the first point was what makes Jehovah happy? Number two. Number two.
How might my choice affect others? Have you got that? How might my choice affect others?
We would never want to stumble anyone. Even in a family matter, such as attending a wedding or
a funeral in a church which we may consider as a personal matter, we need to weigh the effect our
decision could have on others. It could affect them in one of two ways. Now the first is the obvious
way. In some areas of a witness even entered a church, his brothers and sisters would lose respect
for him. But there's a second way the witness could stumble someone. He might be able to attend
the funeral and make no compromise. But suppose a new brother decided to follow his example when a
family member died. The new brother could give in to family pressure and participate in idolatry.
How tragic is that? The Apostle Paul never worshiped idols. So when meat that had been offered to
an idol went up for sale at a meat market, it probably didn't bother Paul's conscience to buy it
because he knew that an idol is nothing. But somehow his brothers had worshipped those very idols
before coming into the truth. They could have felt guilty about eating that meat. To them,
it would be like having a communion meal with an idol. The feelings of his brothers were important
to Paul. He was willing to sacrifice his own rights for the sake of his brothers.
We'd never want to take the unloving view that if our brother is stumbled by what we do,
it's too bad for him. On the other hand, if we're the type of person who is often stumbled by
what others do, we need to ask Jehovah to help us gain a more balanced viewpoint. So far,
we've discussed the need to make Jehovah happy and to consider the feelings of our brothers.
What's next? Number three, have I asked for counsel? Have you got that? Have I asked for counsel?
Now maybe the elders haven't dealt with the exact situation we're facing, but they know a lot of
people. They may know someone who has dealt with the situation before and seen how we handled it.
Or they may know about the effect the decision had on others, for example,
they might know how the congregation reacted the last time someone attended a wedding
or a funeral in a church. Another situation where brothers often ask for the help of the elders
involves the use of blood fractions. Should we accept them or not?
The governing body has refused to impose its conscience on the brotherhood.
And what do we know? We know that the Bible says to abstain from blood.
But as you divide it into fractions, and the fractions get tinier and tinier,
at what point does blood stop being blood? Each one will have to decide that for himself.
Now some might say, well, if it's a really, really tiny fraction, it doesn't bother me to take it.
But others will say, it doesn't matter to me. If it's from blood, I don't want it.
And their conscience also has to be respected. Now let's illustrate.
Air is made up of nitrogen and oxygen. And together, they make up 99% of air.
That leaves 1%. The 1% is made up of a variety of gases, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, neon,
small fractions. When it comes to small fractions, elders need to be careful, though,
not to insert their personal opinion into the discussion, such as by saying,
I wouldn't take any of it. They should simply help the publisher to reason on the basic principles
and let him make up his own mind. So where are we? We make sure whole of the happy,
we consider the feelings of our brothers and sisters, we ask for counsel. Number four,
did I take the time? Did I take the time to meditate prayerfully before making my decision?
Your goal is to make Jehovah happy. So you wouldn't want to make your decision hastily and
then ask Jehovah to bless it. We should ask Jehovah for guidance first, rather than asking him to
bless the decision we've already made. Have you ever heard someone say, that doesn't bother my
conscience? We might not be able to do it. We might not be able to do it.
Have you ever heard someone say, that doesn't bother my conscience? We might ask,
how did he come to that conclusion? Did he follow the four steps we just mentioned?
Did he do research to learn what makes Jehovah happy? Did he think about how others might be
affected? Did he ask for counsel? And did he meditate prayerfully on his decision? Or,
is he just following his feelings? Following your feelings isn't the same as following a
Bible-trained conscience. I'm going to repeat that. Following your feelings is not the same as
following a Bible-trained conscience. Our conscience needs to be trained in harmony with
scriptural principles. Now, Paul's counsel conscience didn't bother him a bit when he was
persecuting Christians. He thought he was doing Jehovah a favor. But when he realized how
Jehovah felt about it, he knew he had to change. We have to be sure that we're really getting
Jehovah's thinking on matters. Remember Jeremiah 17 and verse 9. Simple expression, but so true.
Jeremiah chapter 17 and verse 9. It says,
the heart is more treacherous than anything else and is desperate. Who can know it?
The heart is treacherous. We might allow our emotions to get the better of us. For example,
when a family member is disfellowshipped. If the person is living outside the home, we know
that we should limit our association to necessary family business. Now, if the family was never
very close, that might not be a problem. But suppose family ties are really strong. That can
be a challenge. If we allow ourselves to be ruled by emotion, rather than by scriptural principles,
we could stretch the meaning of necessary family business to include almost any activity.
The heart is treacherous.
Asking ourselves the four questions we just mentioned can help us to make decisions based on
godly principles rather than simply relying on our feelings. Now, let's see how mature Christians
can apply these principles and how the elders can help. The following video interviews are about
weddings and funerals, a touchy subject in many cultures, as you will see.
In Japan, religious rituals are associated with each stage of life and with each season of the
year. As Jehovah's Witnesses, we want to keep the cleanliness and unity of the congregation.
In this regard, one of the most delicate areas is the decision on whether to attend a non-witness
funeral or not. The first thing we must consider regarding funerals is not to be involved in religious
rituals, the acts of worship that are condemned by the Bible. In harmony with the principle at
the 2 Corinthians chapter 6 and verse 14, we need to keep completely separate from pagan acts of
worship. Next, even if we don't participate in the worship of other religions, we need to
consider if our decisions could stumble someone in the congregation. When we consider the Bible
principle in Luke chapter 17, verse 2, we do not want our decisions to hinder the faith of someone
in the congregation. The third point to think about is our conscience.
We need to seriously think about the Bible principle in Galatians chapter 6, verse 5,
where it says that each must carry his own load. This Bible principle also applies when elders
want to support others. Of course, those in the congregation can ask the elders for support
in issues related to funerals. However, in matters of conscience, elders cannot force decisions
on others. So it would be wrong to make some kind of rule regarding attending non-witness funerals.
If each person can make decisions based on Bible principles, we can have a truly peaceful
and free atmosphere, where each individual's differing situation is respected.
This would really contribute to the unity of the congregation, and all can maintain a clean
conscience and serve happily before Jehovah. In my culture, specifically the Namibian or Shihuambo
culture, like in many African cultures, there are many artistic customs related to weddings
that are included in wedding celebrations. Unfortunately, my family is not in the truth,
so obviously for Ben and I, that was one of the main concerns. They don't understand our worship
of Jehovah and they understand that we apply Bible principles and not a tradition of men.
We got engaged before the pandemic, but obviously now that our wedding was to be over video
conferencing, it meant that we didn't have control over many things. We tried to imagine situations
that could stumble our brothers or disrupt the unity in the congregation. We had to, in advance,
think of Bible principles that would apply in our case, but particularly what we also found
helpful was speaking to a mature elder. He gave us a principle in Proverbs 14 verse 15.
He told us to be very careful when people say, I will do this or I won't do this at your wedding.
Basically, it was up to us to make sure that the proceedings or things that happened at our
wedding would be in order and in harmony with Bible principles. Another principle that came to
mind was 1 Corinthians 10 verse 23. So obviously we knew that we had the right to do many things,
but we were also very conscious of how our brothers would view our wedding. We didn't want
anybody to be at our wedding and feel embarrassed or even stumbled to be there.
Now, looking back at our wedding, we look back with fond memories.
So a buying Bible principle doesn't restrict our fun. Also it contributed to the unity
among our brothers because all of us, those present, those who were invited, we were able to enjoy
the wedding. You're not worried about, oh, did that thing offend anybody? So you're able to
enjoy the day without any bad memories. As you can see, our brothers in many countries are faced
with very difficult decisions where weddings and funerals are concerned. The guidance the
elders can provide is invaluable. Now sometimes medical doctors complain that their witness
patients are inconsistent because we don't all have the same view of certain medical treatments.
One witness patient accepts certain fractions or therapies. So the doctor figures he knows what
Jehovah's Witnesses believe. But then the next patient comes along and he rejects them all.
The doctor is confused. Those doctors don't understand the role of the conscience.
We shouldn't worry when medical professionals don't understand our differing viewpoints because
we should be glad that we serve a God who dignifies us with the freedom to make many
of our own decisions. Now the Apostle Paul mentioned four qualities that will help us to maintain
the uniting bond of peace. And we're going to find those qualities at Ephesians chapter 4 and we're
going to zero in on verse 2. Let's turn to Ephesians chapter 4 and we're going to look at verse 2.
Now we read verses 3 to 6 earlier and you know that Paul was concerned about unity. Unity is what
he had on his mind. And now he's telling us that these four qualities are going to help us to
maintain our unity earnestly endeavoring. Remember what he said earnestly endeavoring to maintain
the oneness of the Spirit. The work that we need to put into promoting unity. Verse 2.
With all humility and mildness with patience putting up with one another in love.
Isn't that beautiful? You notice the qualities humility, mildness, patience and love.
When we're humble we recognize that our opinion isn't always the right one.
Humility will also prevent us from trying to impose our conscience on others as if
Jehovah had appointed us to judge them. What about mildness?
Mildness will help us to think about the effect our words might have on our brothers and sisters.
We would never want to hurt them even when we strongly disagree with them. And we should give
them the benefit of the doubt. If someone says something that makes you mad, pray before you speak.
Pray before you speak. Love covers a multitude of sins which contributes to the peace of the congregation.
And we deeply appreciate it when our brothers are patient with us. In turn we need to be patient
because we're all at different stages of spiritual growth and we have to acknowledge that.
Well we've talked about making Jehovah happy with our decisions. We can also please Jehovah when
we work hard to promote peace in the congregation. And sometimes it does take an earnest
endeavor sometimes we have to work hard at ensuring that the congregation is at peace.
What about the elders? The elders take the lead in working together in unity.
They should always speak with the united voice. If they don't the congregation will sense that
they're divided and this will make the brothers and sisters uneasy. Any difference of opinion
should we work down in private while showing deep respect for one another. Just because someone
disagrees with us doesn't make him a bad person. We have to understand that. And his
difference of opinion may search us through. It may be something that we need to think about and
consider. And we always consider that the other person may be right. What about us publishers?
If we're having a hard time getting along with someone, rather than asking Jehovah to change him,
we should ask Jehovah to mold us like the great potter he is. We should ask him to show us why
he drew that person to the congregation. Remember what Jesus said? No one comes to him unless the
father draws him. What does Jehovah see in that person that we aren't seeing? We each have a
responsibility to contribute to the peace and unity of the congregation.
May Jehovah bless us as we work toward that goal.